Hi everyone,
Today I want to talk about optical interferometry,  

a method that is frequently used to measure the 
properties of optical components and systems.  

What initially made me want to do a video about 
this subject is this ZYGO interferometer, that I  

bought a while ago second hand. A new instrument 
of this type is financially far out of my reach,  

and I must admit, this one wasn’t a bargain 
either. But the thing is, I’ve wanted to own  

a high-quality interferometer for a long time, 
if only to get away from the DIY-setups I’ve  

used so far. And since these instruments are 
not abundantly available second hand, I just  

had to take this rare opportunity to buy one.
In case you have no idea what this instrument is:  

with it you can very accurately measure the 
shape of flat and spherical optical interfaces,  

like the ones you find on lenses and mirrors. And 
with accurately I mean: in the nanometer range.  

But not only that, you can also measure the 
performance of complete optical systems. So,  

a good interferometer is an indispensable tool for 
anyone involved in optical fabrication. Because  

in the end, the quality of your optics is mainly 
limited by the quality of your testing methods. 
 

This particular instrument was produced 
by ZYGO in August of 1996. It was sold  

to Philips Electronics in Eindhoven, 
where it was used to check the surface  

shape of lenses for special optical 
disk drives. From what I understood,  

some of these lenses were produced from small 
polished glass balls. These were cut in pieces,  

and then transformed into very short 
focal distance lenses. Now, at some point,  

the activity was transferred to a Philips spin-off 
called Anteryon and the interferometer was sold to  

an employee, who basically stored it for a couple 
of years. He then sold it to me, together with a  

black and white monitor and the transmission 
sphere that was used to test the lenses.
 

In this video, I’ll first discuss 
the principle behind interferometry,  

and then we will look at the layout of the 
instrument and how it works exactly. And in  

an upcoming video I will show how I pimped the 
instrument a bit with a modern ccd camera. 
 

As I said earlier, in optics manufacture, 
interferometry is a frequently used method  

to characterize both optical surfaces as well 
as complete systems. The method is based on  

analyzing interference patterns and extract so 
called “wavefront” information from them and I  

will discuss the meaning of the word wavefront in 
a second. Interferometry is an extremely sensitive  

and accurate method that can be used to establish 
the general shape of an interface, but also things  

like waviness or even surface roughness. It 
does also have some limitations: The measurement  

range is generally fairly limited to several 
microns. Also, it’s unsuitable for interfaces that  

contain sharp step-like height features, because 
these cannot be unambiguously identified. So,  

in general, interferometry is most accurate when 
the surfaces we want to test are fairly smooth. 
 

Now, I just mentioned the word “wavefront”, 
which I think is not a trivial concept.  

I guess we have all experienced wavefronts at some 
point in our lives but I’m not referring to those.  

In optics a wavefront is actually a continuous set 
of points that have identical phase. So, what does  

that mean? Well, from a classical viewpoint, light 
is an electromagnetic field that harmonically  

oscillates and propagates in space. And at any 
given point in this process, the electric and  

magnetic field components can be described by 
the Maxwell equations. So here I’ve tried to  

schematically draw the electromagnetic field in 
a somewhat larger volume and if you examine the  

phase of these waves, you can identify planes 
where the phase of the electromagnetic field  

is identical. And a continuous set of points that 
have the same phase value is called a wavefront. 
 

One property of a wavefront is that its shape 
is always transverse or perpendicular to the  

local direction of wave propagation. Here 
this is illustrated for a few differently  

shaped wavefronts where the arrows indicate the 
direction of wave propagation. Now in general,  

phase relationships for different points in 
space are only well-defined when the waves  

have one specific wavelength. And if we want to 
do interferometry, it is vital that the light we  

use is of one particular wavelength, which 
is also called monochromatic light. And in  

the rest of the video, I’ll assume that the 
light used is more or less monochromatic.
 

A frequently used way to generate monochromatic 
radiation is by means of a laser. This is because,  

the process of stimulated emission which takes 
place in the laser cavity, favors the generation  

of light in a very narrow wavelength range. 
Also, the wavefront exiting the laser cavity is  

virtually flat over the aperture. And because the 
light has an extremely well-defined wavelength,  

in other words it has a very narrow spectral 
bandwidth, phase relationships in the field  

exiting the laser can be preserved over long 
distances. Another way to say this is that lasers  

have a large coherence length, which is generally 
between half a meter up to several kilometers for  

certain special types of lasers. In practice 
this means that, if we take 2 points A and B in  

the light path and we look at the variations in 
the phase difference between these 2 points, we  

will find that these will be relatively small. And 
the distance over which variations in phase remain  

acceptable is called the coherence length. As you 
can see from this equation, the coherence length  

(Lc) is inversely proportional to the spectral 
band width (delta nu) of the light source. And  

so light sources with a very narrow emission line 
will generally have a long coherence length. 
 

Another source of monochromatic light frequently 
used in interferometry is the low-pressure sodium  

lamp, which mainly generates light in a 
narrow emission band at 589nm. However,  

the spectral bandwidth of the Sodium emission 
line is much broader than that of lasers and  

the phase relationships generally only 
hold over distances smaller than a mm.
 

Now, measuring the shape of a wavefront 
directly in the visible part of the  

electromagnetic spectrum is not easy and that is 
because of the very high frequencies involved.  

For electromagnetic radiation of longer 
wavelengths, like for example radio waves,  

we can measure the phase of the alternating fields 
directly. And that is because the oscillations  

have a relatively low frequency, say generally 
somewhere in the mega- or giga- Hertz range.  

And so, we can point a bunch of antennas to the 
sky, measure the Electromagnetic signals that  

are received in each of them and establish the 
shape of the wavefront for a particular frequency  

by looking for phase correlations. And based on 
this information we can then identify the exact  

direction from which the radiation is emitted. But 
visible light has a frequency more than a thousand  

times higher than even the highest frequency 
radio waves. And for frequencies this high, it is  

technically infeasible to measure phase directly 
for an oscillating electromagnetic field.
 

However, what we can easily measure with 
optical detectors, like CCD- or CMOS-sensors,  

is spatial intensity variations. And 
that is where interferometry comes in:  

instead of trying to measure the phase in light 
directly, this method works by studying the  

interference patterns resulting from the addition 
of a second wavefront that has a known shape.
 

Let me start by showing you a very simple 
example of how this works in light.  

For this experiment we need a monochromatic 
light source and a flat surface. As a light  

source we’ll use a sodium lamp and for the 
surface we will use a flat optical test glass.  

Now, a typical air-glass interface 
reflects about 4% of the incident light  

and with a uniform light source, 
we observe a uniform reflection.  

Let’s now place 2 differently shaped surfaces on 
top of this reference surface for evaluation. What  

we observe is that these objects show 2 different 
interference patterns. The part to the left,  

shows straight lines with equal spacing. And the 
one to the right, displays these curved lines or  

circular fringes, depending on the exact surface 
orientation. Now, it’s these intensity variations  

that actually contain detailed information about 
the difference in shape between reference surface  

and the two surfaces under test. We just need 
to know how to interpret what we see exactly. 
 

So, what do we see? Well let me explain with 
an animation. I admit, the following is a  

simplification and it’s not correctly visualizing 
the physics, but it’s actually quite illustrative.  

Here is a wavefront that has just reflected off 
a flat reference surface, so this wavefront is  

basically also flat. And so the image shows a 
2D cross section of the flat optical wavefronts.  

If we place a sensor in the path of the 
light, we can measure the intensity,  

and what we observe is that it is basically the 
same everywhere and this tells us exactly nothing  

about the shape of the wavefront. Now, let’s add 
a second wavefront that has reflected of a second  

surface that is slightly tilted. In this example 
the wavefront is also flat and what we observe  

is that the intensity now becomes non-uniformly. 
And this is caused by constructive and destructive  

interference between the 2 reflected wavefronts 
at the second interface. Here, the electromagnetic  

field is the linear sum of the contributions 
of the fields of the 2 wavefronts. And so,  

in some points where these contributions are 
always in phase, they add up. On the other hand,  

in places where the two are exactly in out 
of phase, the field contributions cancel each  

other out and if they are of equal amplitude, 
effectively the resulting field becomes zero. 
 

In the case of 2 flat wavefronts, we will observe 
linear and equally spaced fringes. The density of  

the interference pattern itself is dependent 
on the wedge or angle between the surfaces.  

And the position of the fringes is dependent 
on the distance between the two surfaces. Now,  

you might think that linear and equally spaced 
fringes are indicative for the presence of 2 flat  

surfaces. And that is partly correct, but 2 curved 
wavefronts with the same radius of curvature will  

actually also display linear and equally spaced 
fringes, when displaced or tilted. However,  

when two wavefronts have different radii, this 
results in curved fringes. This is for example  

the case when we have a flat- and a spherical 
wavefront interfering. Or when we have 2 spherical  

wavefronts that have a different radius curvature. 
So, I guess it is important to realize that  

the observed interference pattern only gives us 
information about differences in wavefront shape.
 

In the example just shown with the sodium lamp 
light, we only observe interference between  

interfaces when they are placed very close 
together. And that is because of the limited  

coherence length of the light. So whether we see a 
clear interference pattern is dependent on whether  

stable phase relationships exist between the 
reflections coming off the two surfaces at the  

point where they start interfering. This means 
that with a coherence length smaller than a mm,  

the surfaces need to be quite close to each 
other in order to observe interference fringes. 
 

Now I just stated that in constructive 
interference, the electromagnetic fields  

add up and in destructive interference, the 
2 contributions cancel each other out. So,  

what does this mean for intensity? Well, 
light intensity is equivalent to the power  

per unit of surface and so it is actually 
not the same thing as the magnitude of  

the electromagnetic field. In fact, intensity 
scales with the square of this field. And so,  

if we have 2 reflections of equal magnitude, say 
both are 4%, this means that for the location of  

constructive interference, intensity could be 
4 times as high. And that is actually what is  

generally observed in interference patterns: 
that the intensity in the bright areas is  

much brighter than the sum of the 2 individual 
intensities. But of course, if we look on average,  

the intensity over the whole area will still 
equal to the sum of the 2 individual intensities.
 

Anyway, enough background. Let’s return to the 
ZYGO interferometer itself and take a peek under  

the hood to see what’s going on inside. In order 
to do that we need to remove 2 different lids:  

the outer one is made of plastic and is 
basically just cosmetic. The second one is  

made out of aluminum sheet metal and is intended 
as RF-shielding for the electronics inside. 
 

First thing you notice is, that it isn’t awfully 
full inside. There is a helium Neon laser with  

its high-voltage power supply. Then there are a 
few optical components like a steering mirror for  

the laser beam, a variable filter that can be 
moved mechanically using a long rod. This rod  

also operates a switch, that activates either of 
2 pcb-cameras that are also found in the top part  

of the interferometer. The cameras by the way 
have CCD-chips of about 6x4mm in size and are  

fairly low resolution. Both cameras have lenses 
mounted in front of them. One of the camera is  

above a tiny beam splitter, and the other one is 
above a diffusor with a crosshair printed on it.  

In the bottom compartment, behind the lid 
here, we find a mains 12V DC power supply,  

a large beam splitter, a mirror under 45 
degrees and 4-inch collimation lens. And  

apart from a few brackets and mounts that hold 
the optics together, that is basically it. 
 

So you might wonder: why was this thing the 
price of a luxury car back in 1996? Well,  

apart from I suspect a healthy profit margin, 
there are several reasons: of course, it’s not  

really a mass manufactured item. But another 
reason is that every component inside appears  

to be of very high quality. Take for example 
the Helium Neon laser: according to the label,  

the tube has been specifically selected for this 
type of instrument. Why? Well, if we look at the  

specification of the coherence length of the 
interferometer, we see that it is larger than  

100m. This means that the wavelength variations 
in the laser light need to be extremely low,  

so that phase relationships hold over distances of 
more than 100m. Now, I calculated what this means  

in terms of frequency stability and found that 
variations in the frequency of the 632nm light  

cannot be more than 2. 10-7 percent. And so, this 
means that not just any random laser will do.
 

So let me take you through the functionality of 
all the components step by step using schematics.  

Here is the Helium-Neon laser, which 
outputs a highly coherent beam of  

light. The direction of the beam can be 
optimized with a small steering mirror,  

after which the beam goes through the variable 
attenuation filter. This filter allows adjustment  

of the general brightness of the laser beam. 
After having passed the attenuation filter, the  

beam is going into a gradient index lens, which 
is connected to a very small beam splitter. 
 

Now, a gradient index lens is a small glass rod 
that contains a gradient in refractive index,  

that runs from the center to edge of the rod. 
Since the refractive index has the highest value  

in the center, the optical wave front in the 
laser beam is gradually delayed more towards  

the center of the rod. The wavefront therefore 
becomes curved, which effectively results in  

focusing of the light into a tight focal point. 
And after passing this focal point, the beam  

expands again into a nicely spherical wavefront. A 
small beam splitter sends the spherical wavefront  

to the partially reflective surface of a 
second, much larger beam splitter. This  

surface reflects the light towards a collimation 
lens, where the light exits the instrument. 
 

The function of the collimation lens is to 
convert the spherical wavefront into a flat  

wavefront of 4 inches in diameter. And this 
flat wavefront can serve as the basis for all  

kinds of interferometric tests. For example, we 
can place 2 partially reflective flat interfaces  

into this output beam, one being a reference 
interface and one being the interface that  

we like to test for flatness. And due to 
the large coherence length of the light,  

more than 100m, these interfaces don’t have 
the be necessarily very close together.  

The light reflecting off these surfaces 
is directed back into the interferometer  

approximately along the same path as it came 
from, goes through the small beam splitter  

again and is then collimated and projected on 
a CCD chip. And this allows us to observe the  

interference pattern between the 2 reflections 
and evaluate this visually on the monitor. 
 

Now, to steer the light of both the reference 
and test surface exactly back through the tiny  

beam splitter here, is pretty hard. And 
you don’t see anything with camera 1,  

until things are almost perfectly aligned. So, to 
make life a lot easier, the people at ZYGO added  

this alignment functionality to the system. Part 
of the light from the reflections can pass this  

larger beam splitter. This part continues straight 
on, is reflected at a 90 degrees angle and then  

reaches a glass diffuser plate that contains a 
cross-hair pattern. Because this diffusor plate is  

exactly at the focal distance of the collimation 
lens, the reflections create tiny spots here. And  

their positions can be observed by camera 2 that 
is only intended for alignment purposes. Now,  

this alignment unit has a much larger field of 
view and what we can do now is simply align the  

position of surface reflections such that they 
are at the center of the cross-hair. And when  

that is the case, the system is automatically also 
aligned on camera 1 and we can immediately observe  

an interferogram. Now, the interferometers 
that I made myself did not have this kind of  

feature and it must admit that this makes 
aligning optics really a piece of cake.
 

Here you see the location of the collimation 
lens, viewed from the outside of the instrument.  

In front of it is an adjustment mechanism 
that is intended for mounting various  

reference surfaces to the interferometer 
directly, like the F/0.75 transmission  

sphere that came with the interferometer. The 
adjustment mechanism has 2 degrees of freedom,  

which are tip and tilt. This allows the angle of 
the transmission reference to be oriented with  

respect to the surface under test.
When testing optical components,  

you generally test the surface shape before 
the interfaces get coated. And so in the case  

of glass this means that they reflect around 4% of 
the incident light. So, the transmission reference  

also needs to reflect around 4% back into the 
interferometer to get high-contrast fringes.
 

To test spherical surfaces, you need a spherical 
reference surface that somehow reflects 4% of the  

light exiting the interferometer right back into 
the instrument. Now the way this is achieved is as  

follows: here I’ve drawn a schematic of the inside 
of a transmission sphere assembly to show you how  

that is achieved. The reference surface is the 
last interface of the assembly, here indicated in  

yellow. All the other surfaces are anti-reflection 
coated for the laser wavelength, but even more  

importantly, they are also designed in such a way, 
that the light reaches the reference interface  

exactly perpendicular. And this means that it is 
the only interface in the transmission sphere that  

sends a reflection back where it came from and 
then enters the interferometer as a collimated  

beam. Of course, 96% of the light continues on 
to the surface under test, which also reflects  

around 4%. And so we observe the interference 
occurring between these 2 interfaces. 
 

With a spherical transmission reference, we 
can test convex- as well as concave optics.  

For convex optics, only radii smaller than the 
radius of the transmission sphere itself can be  

tested. For concave optics, the only limitation 
for the radius to be tested is that it should be  

less than half of the maximum coherence length 
of the light source which is in this case 50m. 
 

Now I want to save most of the experiments 
that I had in mind for another video,  

but let’s just do one simple experiment. For 
this test, we’ll just use the flat wavefront  

exiting the instrument. And what we will try to 
measure is the difference in shape between the  

2 surfaces of a Zerodur test glass. This test 
glass has one side which I know is very flat,  

around 1/20th of a wavelength. And this is 
going to be our reference interface. But the  

other side is somewhat less flat. And what 
we’ll try to find out is how much that is. 
 

The two interfaces are spaced 20 mm apart and 
both reflect about 4% of the incident light. So  

we can just place the disk in the beam exiting 
the interferometer, align the position of the  

2 reflections simultaneously and then look at 
the interference pattern. And this is what it  

looks like. As you can see, we get a nice and 
clear interference pattern, which by the way is  

extremely stable with no effects of vibrations 
from the environment. That is because the two  

surfaces are basically mechanically connected 
to each other by a solid piece of Zerodur.  

Now, the small circular spots are just dust 
particles in the optical path and these are  

not important for our evaluation. All the 
information about the difference in shape  

and orientation between the 2 surfaces is 
contained in the 4 more or less vertical  

fringes. And because we know that 
one side is almost perfectly flat,  

any curvature in the fringe pattern is the 
result of non-flatness of the second surface. 
 

So, let’s try to evaluate this pattern visually. 
The most obvious feature is of course the presence  

of the 4 vertical fringes, that indicate that 
there is a wedge between the 2 interfaces in  

horizontal direction. And we can calculate how 
large this wedge is, based on the number of  

fringes. It is a little over 4 Lambda wavefront, 
meaning that there is a wedge half of that between  

the 2 surfaces, so just 2 wavelengths. Why 
half? Well, that is because in reflection,  

any deviations in surface shape, lead to twice 
the deviation in the wavefront shape. And so,  

deviations in surface shape are only 
half of that observed in the wavefront.  

Now, since the wavelength of the laser is 632.8nm 
and the wedge is 2 lambda between the 2 surface  

this, would mean a gradient in distance of 
approx. 1.3 microns. But there is a little  

catch in this case. Because we are comparing 2 
surfaces with Zerodur between them, we should  

actually use the wavelength in this material. 
Which means that we should divide the wavelength  

in air or vacuum by the refractive index of 
Zerodur, which is 1.54. So this means that the  

wedge is actually only 840nm. But which side is 
thicker? It’s hard to tell because as for wedge,  

we would see the same type of interference pattern 
in either case. So at this point, we don’t know.
 

Okay, let’s for a moment focus on the curvature 
of the fringes now, which indicates a difference  

in the radius between the 2 surfaces. If 
we look at how much the curvature in the  

fringes deviates from a straight line, we see 
that it is largest here in the center, and it  

is about 0.4 times the fringe spacing, which 
translates to 0.4 wavelength of height difference  

between edge and center of the disk. For the 
surface error, which again is half of that,  

we find 0.2 wavelengths, Now, since we also 
need to use the wavelength inside Zerodur here,  

this means that the surface curvature is 0.2*times 
the wavelength divided by the refractive index,  

which results in a value of 82nm. But 
in which direction is the curve? Is the  

surface under test 82nm concave or convex? As 
with the direction of the wedge, there is no  

easy way to tell. So now we end up with these 4 
configurations of which only one can be correct. 
 

With a little logic though, you could at this 
point already discard 2 of these as infeasible.  

But of course, you want to know exactly which 
configuration of the 4 is correct, right?  

So, if that is indeed the case, figure it out 
yourself. You just need a 2 more pieces of  

information. Here is the first hint: if I press 
my finger against the backside of the disk,  

so on the surface under test, we can observe 
that the interferogram changes due to temperature  

increase of the material by the heat of my finger. 
Locally, it is only a few degrees Celsius higher,  

but the effect is very noticeable because 
we are measuring in the nanometer range.  

Now, the second piece of information you need 
is about the expansion coefficient of the  

material. As you can see from the specifications 
of Zerodur, it can be either positive or negative.  

But this piece of Zerodur has a positive 
coefficient of thermal expansion, which  

means it expands with temperature increase. And 
with these 2 additional pieces of information,  

it is possible tell which of these 4 options 
is correct. Now, the first person to make  

a comment with the correct answer and 
course why, owns the pinned comment.
 

Okay, so the latter was a very brief explanation 
of how you can evaluate interferograms visually.  

And, the above example was actually relatively 
easy. Imagine your interferogram looks something  

like this. Or this. In these cases, it would be 
quite a bit more challenging to make accurate  

statements about the exact surface shape. This 
is why in the next video about this subject,  

I have replaced the current analog camera with a 
high-resolution IP-camera. This allows for very  

detailed evaluation of interferograms using 
software. And with the help of this software,  

we can measure wedges, angles, surface 
curvature, and even the effects of warm  

fingers very accurately. Also, we will take a look 
at how to measure the shape of various optical  

surfaces, and the quality of lens assemblies. So, 
hopefully I’ll see you in the next video again. 

